# x3dpy_containerfield

The purpose of this repository is to create a patch for the existing code for the x3d package, as deployed as PyPI; that will enable the x3d.py to write appropriate containerField attributes when generating an XML encoding of a Python-based X3D scene.

 
- The x3d package Subversion based repository is at [x3d Sourceforge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/x3d/)

- The work in this patch is inspired by and  indebted to [andreasplesch/x3d-python-mod](https://github.com/andreasplesch/x3d-python-mod)

## Strategy:
The release from this project will be a modified X3duomToX3dPythonPackage.xslt stylesheet based on  [X3duomToX3dPythonPackage.xslt on Sourceforge](https://svn.code.sf.net/p/x3d/code/www.web3d.org/x3d/stylesheets/X3duomToX3dPythonPackage.xslt) at revision 38473. The release will also have a patch file, as generated by diff, that will allow later revisions of the version-control stylesheet to be updated.

## Scripts
This repository includes 4 Python scripts which execute following functions:

### Generate x3d Python package

Generate the x3d package, a folder containing an `__init__.py` file and an `x3d.py` file generated by the XSLT stylesheet at `x3d/stylesheets/X3duomToX3dPythonPackage.xslt` . This stylesheet requires input file `specifications/X3dUnifiedObjectModel-4.0.xml` , `x3d/tooltips/profile.dtd` , `x3d/tooltips/x3d-4.0.profile.xml` .

Implemented with script generate_x3D_package; with no command line arguments or options. 

Typical call from a working directory containing the scripts is:

`python generate_x3D_package.py`


### Convert X3D encoding: Python to XML

Load a Python encoding from a Python source file entered as a command line argument and output a XML encoding using the x3d package as generated in function (1).

### Convert X3D encoding: XML to Python

Generate a Python encoding from an XML encoding, using the XSLT stylesheet `x3d/stylesheets/X3dToPython.xslt` applied to an XML encoding (.x3d ) file specified as a command line argument. This task is part of the unit testing of the generated x3d package; developing the XML -> Python conversion is not a goal of this repository.

### Test execution of Python encoding

Load a Python encoded X3D scene into the Python interpreter by executing the Python generated in function (3). No output from the interpreter is written. This function is part of the unit testing process and is intended to filter out Python encodings from function (3) which are not syntactically correct Python code.



## Unit Testing

```
python encoding_roundtrip_test.py --samples test_data/test_filepaths.txt
```

## Java environment

The XSLT driven processes are executed using the Saxonica Java XSLT engine. THe Python scripts require that the working environment be configured so that  a bare java invocation executed on the command line runs the java engine, and that the `net.sf.saxon.Transform` class is available on the class resolution path. 

The Java engine used in development was

```
java version  25.0.1  2025-10-21 LTS
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 25.0.1+8-LTS-27)
```

and the `net.sf.saxon.Transform` was deployed from `saxon-he-12.9.jar` downloaded from [Saxonica](https://www.saxonica.com).